⏮ ~~Previous step~~&nbsp;|&nbsp;[🏠 Up](./00-index.md)&nbsp;|&nbsp;[⏭ Next step: Building the UI](./02-building-the-ui.md)

----

## Step 1: Get your repository cloned and environment set up

In this step, you will clone a local copy of a repository we've already
created for you, and you'll use code generation tools to create the initial
code for a [React] single-page web application, or "SPA."

### Context

[React] is a JavaScript library for building interactive user interfaces for
the web. We're going to use it to build our animal shelter front-end.

React provides a tool called [`create-react-app`] which generates the code
needed for a basic React application with a single command. We are going to
clone (or "check out") our repository so that we have a local copy of it, and
then use [`create-react-app`] to generate the initial code for our app.

### Configure Git

If you haven't already, it's a good idea to configure Git with your name and
email address so your changes will be correctly attributed to you. In
PowerShell (or your preferred shell), run:

    git config --global user.name "Your Name"
    git config --global user.email you@example.com

### Cloning your repository

You should have received a slip of paper with the name of your personal
repository on it. The name will be something like `happy-rover`, and you'll
be able to find it within the [CodessInTheClassroom GitHub organisation].

To clone your repository, open up PowerShell (or your preferred shell):

1. Create a local folder to keep your code and change to it. For example, to
   create `C:\CodessInTheClassroom`:

       mkdir C:\CodessInTheClassroom
       cd C:\CodessInTheClassroom

2. Find your repository within the [CodessInTheClassroom GitHub organisation].

3. Clone your repository using the instructions in [our Git
   cheatsheet](../git-cheatsheet.md#clone). For example:

       git clone https://github.com/codessintheclassroom/happy-rover.git

### Creating the initial application code

Now we'll use [`create-react-app`] to create the initial code for our
application:

1. Launch Visual Studio Code and use `File → Open Folder` in the menus to
   open the `frontend` folder within your checked-out repository. For
   example, if your repository was called `happy-rover`, open the folder
   `C:\CodessInTheClassroom\happy-rover\frontend`.

2. Open a terminal using `Terminal → New Terminal`.

3. We're going to create a [TypeScript]-based application. TypeScript is a
   "superset" of JavaScript (so all JavaScript is also valid TypeScript) that
   will allow us to add type constraints to our application code which make
   it easier to spot programming errors. If you're interested in learning
   more about this, you can read more about [TypeScript] or ask one of the
   mentors!

   In the terminal you started, run the following to create the application:

       npx create-react-app . --typescript
       npm start

    If you're interested in what `create-react-app` is doing, you can [read
    its "Getting Started"
    guide](https://facebook.github.io/create-react-app/docs/getting-started).

4. If it doesn't open automatically, open http://localhost:3000/ in your
   browser to see the running application. (It doesn't do much yet!)

### Commit the code changes and push to GitHub

So far, we've generated a basic react app, which we will build on to create
the animal shelter front-end. If you look at your repository folder now,
you'll see a lot of files that were generated by `create-react-app`. This is
what we'd call "scaffolding" or "boilerplate" code. It's the foundation on
which we'll build our application.

We'll commit and push this code to our master branch now for two reasons:

1. This is a checkpoint for us: we have stable code which starts up a basic
   React app that we can return to if needed.
2. We will now start customizing this code to our needs, and when we review
   our customizations later, we want to be able to clearly distinguish which
   code we wrote and which of it was generated.

To commit and push your changes:

1. [Read the guidance on staging changes and committing in the Git cheatsheet](../git-cheatsheet.md#commit).

   For example, you could open a new terminal using `Terminal → New Terminal` and run:

       git add .
       git commit

2. [Read the guidance on pushing your changes in the Git cheatsheet](../git-cheatsheet.md#push).

   For example, in a terminal, you could run:

       git push

**N.B.** Normally, we'd push to a branch rather than directly to the `master`
branch, so that we can easily submit our changes for review in a Pull
Request. That's what we'll do next.

### Create a branch for further work

Now we'll create and switch to a branch for the rest of the workshop. This
will allow us to submit a pull request and get our code reviewed later, in
Step 5:

1. [Follow the instructions for creating a branch in the Git
   cheatsheet](../git-cheatsheet.md#create-a-branch). You should give it a
   descriptive name so that you know what it's for, such as
   `yourname/shelter-frontend` (on some teams developers prefix their branch
   names with their usernames) or `shelter-frontend`.

Hooray! You've now bootstrapped your frontend for the animal shelter app.
Continue to [building the user interface for the shelter
app](./02-building-the-ui.md).

[React]: https://reactjs.org/
[`create-react-app`]: https://facebook.github.io/create-react-app/
[CodessInTheClassroom GitHub organisation]: https://github.com/codessintheclassroom
[TypeScript]: https://www.typescriptlang.org/

----

⏮ ~~Previous step~~&nbsp;|&nbsp;[🏠 Up](./00-index.md)&nbsp;|&nbsp;[⏭ Next step: Building the UI](./02-building-the-ui.md)